
Table of Contents
=================

* [TRIC alignment](#alignment)
    * [Overview](#alignment-overview)
    * [Algorithm](#design-of-the-algorithm)
    * [Running TRIC](#runtric)
        * [(Non)-linear pairwise alignment](#pairwise-alignment)
        * [Reference-based alignment](#ref-alignment)
        * [Tree-based alignment](#tree-alignment)
* [TRIC requantification](#requant)
    * [Overview](#requant-overview)

#<a name="alignment"></a> TRIC alignment

##<a name="alignment-overview"></a> Overview

TRIC uses a graph-based alignment strategy based on non-linear retention time
correction to integrate information from all available runs. The input consists
of a set of csv files derived from a targeted proteomics experiment generated
by [OpenSWATH](http://openswath.org/) (using either mProphet or pyProphet) or
generated by [Peakview](http://sciex.com/products/software/peakview-software).

There are two basic running modes available. The first one uses a
reference-based alignment where a single run is chosen as a reference and all
other runs are aligned to it.  This is a useful choice for a small number of
runs that are chromatographically similar. The second mode generates a guidance
tree based on chromatographic similarity of the input runs and uses this tree
to align the targeted proteomics runs (the nodes in the tree are runs and the
edges are pairwise alignments). Generally this mode is better for a large
number of runs or for chromatographically dissimilar samples.

## Design of the Algorithm 

### Alignment Order and RT correction

The first step in the algorithm is to compute the alignment order.  If the
tree-based alignment is used, then first  a set of of high-confidence _anchor
points_ is used to estimate the pairwise chromatographic distance between all
runs. This distance matrix is then used to compute a guidance tree (minimum
spanning tree, MST) where the nodes represent LC-MS/MS runs and the edges
represent pairwise alignments.  If a reference-based approach is used, then a
reference run is selected first (the run with the most features) and a
star-shaped tree is created with the reference run in the middle, connected to
all other runs.

Then, for each edge in the tree, a pairwise non-linear transformation between
the retention time (RT) domains of the two runs at the nodes is computed, using one
of several available methods (e.g. local regression, spline fit, k-nearest
neighbor). 

### Confidence transfer:
Using the guidance tree  from above (star-shaped or MST-based), 
for each measured targeted proteomics assay, traversal of
the global guidance tree starts with a suitable starting point, or _seed_
identification (a identification below the ```--target_fdr``` or
```--fdr_cutoff``` cutoff). During traversal each edge of the tree is visited
sequentially and a confident identification is mapped from one node
(run $n$) to an adjacent node (run $m$), where the choice of using a
MST-guidance tree ensures that the mapping only occurs between
chromatographically similar runs.  During confidence transfer, the
identification confidence of all peakgroups in run $m$ within the specified
retention time window (user-defined or adaptive) is considered. If the
confidence score of the best peakgroup _within the RT window_ passes the
user-defined threshold given by ```--max_fdr_quality```, it gets added to the
result.

The size of he RT window during confidence transfer is given by
```--max_rt_diff```. However, as different parts of the tree may have different
alignment quality, it is possible to use adaptive
retention time windows, derived from the quality of the alignment. This 
approach allows different parameters for confidence transfer on different
parts of the tree, increasing robustness and decreasing the influence of 
outlier runs (see ```--mst:Stdev_multiplier``` parameter).

### Requantification 
TRIC contains a separate, optional requantification step where runs in the
guidance tree where no peakgroup passed the confidence filter can be re-visited
for re-quantification.  In these cases, the software can infer the peak
boundaries from the closest neighboring run and quantify the fragment ion
signal within those boundaries, see [TRIC requantification](#requant).


## Installing TRIC

Please see the [main README file](README.md) for installation instructions.

##<a name="runtric"></a> Running TRIC

To get an overview over all available options, please use 

```
./analysis/alignment/feature_alignment.py --help
```

A sample run of the tool may look as follows:

```
./analysis/alignment/feature_alignment.py 
--in file1_input.csv file2_input.csv file3_input.csv 
--out aligned.csv 
--method best_overall --realign_method diRT --max_rt_diff 90 
--target_fdr 0.01 --max_fdr_quality 0.05 
```

This command will run alignment on 3 files using the (initial) linear iRT alignment
and pick an appropriate peakgroup in each run within the aligned window
using a reference-based alignment.
In order to be reported, each peptide is required to have at least an
identification in at least one run below the 1 % q-value cutoff and each
quantitative cell in the resulting data matrix is required to have a q-value
below 5 %. The maximal RT deviation between the aligned runs is 90 seconds
in the above example (you may choose a smaller value if you select one of the nonlinear
alignment methods).

The individual parameters can be adjusted as follows: 

- `--method` refers to using either a [reference-based](#ref-alignment) alignment or a [tree-based](#tree-alignment)
  alignment (see below).
- ```--realign_method``` Refers to the (non)-linear alignment strategy employed (see [below](#pairwise-alignment)).
- ```--max_rt_diff``` refers to the maximal shift in RT
  *after* alignment that is tolerated. If a peakgroup is shifted more than this
  amount, it is excluded from the result (except if its FDR is below the set
  FDR threshold and a non-`global` strategy was selected in the reference-based
  approach). Note that this a difference, thus the RT window for alignment is
  *twice* the size of this parameter (e.g. the window considered is expectedRT
  +/- ```max_rt_diff```.
- ```--target_fdr``` refers to the desired FDR on assay level.
- ```--max_fdr_quality``` refers to the maximal FDR value a value in
  the data matrix may have to still be considered for quantitation.
- ```--file_format``` Which input file format is used (openswath (default), mprophet or peakview). openswath is used for a file generated by the OpenSwath workflow (OpenSwath + mProphet / pyProphet) while mprophet is used for traditional SRM files generated by the mQuest + mProphet workflow. peakview is for PeakView files.

### <a name="pairwise-alignment"></a> (Non)-linear pairwise alignment

Several options are available for (non)-linear pairwise alignment. Generally,
the alignment is performed by using a set of highly confident "anchor points"
that are present in both runs and then compute a transformation function from
the RT-space of one run into the RT-space of the other run.

The method for pairwise alignment can be selected using ```--realign_method```.
The recommended  method is ```lowess``` (or the faster ```lowess_cython```) or `SmoothLLDMedian`.

The very simple or linear alignment methods are:

- ```diRT``` uses the difference to the expected elution time of the assay computed by OpenSWATH
- ```linear``` performs a linear alignment using the anchor points

The more complex, non-linear alignment methods are:

- ```lowess``` use Robust locally weighted regression for alignment (lowess smoother)
- ```splinePy``` use Python native spline from scikits.datasmooth (slow!)
- ```nonCVSpline``` compute a spline for alignment (no cross-validation) 
- ```CVSpline``` compute a spline for alignment (using cross-validation) 
- ```CVSpline``` compute a spline for alignment (using cross-validation) 
- ```WeightedNearestNeighbour``` weighted interpolation using local linear differences of the k nearest neighbors
- ```SmoothLLDMedian``` local median interpolation using local linear differences of the k nearest neighbors

Several alignment methods require additional packages to be installed:

- ```splineR``` perform alignment using the ```smooth.spline``` function in R (needs the ```rpy2``` package)
- ```splineR_external``` perform alignment using the ```smooth.spline``` function in R (starts an R process using the command line)
- ```Earth``` use Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (needs the ```py-earth``` package)
- ```lowess_cython``` uses a faster lowess implementation (see the [main README file](README.md), "Fast lowess" for install instructions)


### <a name="ref-alignment"></a> Reference-based alignment

The reference-based alignment selects the run with the most features
(identified peakgroups) as the reference. Then all other runs are aligned
against the reference in a pairwise fashion.

This mode can be enabled by choosing `--method` to be one of the following:

- best_overall
- best_cluster_score 
- global_best_cluster_score
- global_best_overall

The recommended method is `global_best_overall`. Note that the two `global`
options will align *all* peakgroups according to retention time whereas the
other two methods will keep peakgroups below the FDR cutoff in all cases. This
means that when using the `global` option, peakgroups below the FDR cutoff may
be removed if they are not at the expected position in  retention time (this is
useful to remove spurious identifications but may lead to low identification
numbers if the parameters are too strict).

The reference-based approach will try to automatically estimate a sensible
value if you set ```--max_rt_diff``` to ```auto_3medianstdev```.

### <a name="tree-alignment"></a> Tree-based alignment

Alternatively, a tree-based alignment is available where the input runs are
arranged in a guidance tree (the nodes in the tree are runs and the edges are
pairwise alignments). This approach is reference-free and means that each
alignment step is purely local and each run is only aligned against runs that
are chromatographically close. Generally this mode is better for a large number
of runs or for chromatographically dissimilar samples.

This mode can be enabled by choosing `--method` to be one of the following:

- LocalMST
- LocalMSTAllCluster

The best choice here is to use `LocalMST` which reports the best result for
each assay. If you want to have a full output where multiple results (multiple
clusters) per peakgroup may be reported, use `LocalMSTAllCluster`. 

The tree-based alignment has several options specific to it:

- ```--mst:useRTCorrection``` Use aligned peakgroup RT to continue threading in MST algorithm. It is highly recommend to set this to "True"
- ```--mst:Stdev_multiplier``` Turn on adaptive RT tolerances: How many standard deviations the peakgroup can deviate in RT during the alignment (if less than max_rt_diff, then max_rt_diff is used). It is recommended to set this to a value between 2.0 and 4.0.
- ```--mst:useLocalStdev``` Use standard deviation of local region of the chromatogram. This is experimental and may not work.

Adaptive RT tolerance can be very useful if not all alignments have the same
quality. This allows the user to set an overall strict tolerance for the
alignment while a few, particularly bad pairwise alignments are allowed to have
a larger tolerance. These "bad" pairwise alignments may potentially be the
edges in the tree that connect two sub-trees which may represent two batches
for example. 

Thus, a sample command for a tree-based alignment may look like this

```
./analysis/alignment/feature_alignment.py 
--in file1_input.csv file2_input.csv file3_input.csv 
--out aligned.csv 
--method LocalMST --realign_method lowess_cython --max_rt_diff 60 
--mst:useRTCorrection True --mst:Stdev_multiplier 3.0 
--target_fdr 0.01 --max_fdr_quality 0.05 
```


### Further parameters


- ```--disable_isotopic_grouping``` Disable grouping of isotopic variants by ```peptide_group_label```, thus disabling matching of isotopic variants of the same peptide across channels. If turned off, each isotopic channel will be matched independently of the other. If enabled, the more certain identification will be used to infer the location of the peak in the other channel.
- ```--use_dscore_filter``` Enable the filter by d score (this is mainly for speedup)
- ```--dscore_cutoff``` Quality cutoff to still consider a feature for alignment using the d_score: everything below this d-score is discarded (this is mainly for speedup)
- ```--nr_high_conf_exp``` Number of experiments in which the peptide needs to be identified with high confidence (e.g. above ``` fdr_curoff ```)
- ```--readmethod``` Read full or minimal transition groups (minimal,full)
- ```--tmpdir``` Temporary directory location
- ```--alignment_score``` Minimal score needed for a feature to be considered for alignment between runs (e.g. score needed to be considered an "anchor point" for pairwise alignment)
- ```--fdr_cutoff``` A fixed m-score cutoff which does not take into account the number of runs (use ```target_fdr``` instead)

#<a name="requant"></a> TRIC requantification

##<a name="requant-overview"></a> Overview

Even after alignment, a complete data matrix will not be achieved. There is a
last step in the TRIC-based workflow that allows requantification of signal
across the integration border derived from alignment. This is implemented as a
second script *after* TRIC since for this step, the chromatograms generated by
OpenSWATH are needed.

```
./analysis/alignment/requantAlignedValues.py 
  --do_single_run run_n_chromatograms.mzML 
  --peakgroups_infile aligned_peakgroups.csv  
  --out requantified_output.csv 
  --realign_runs linear 
  --method singleShortestPath 
```

Note that the ```--do_single_run``` input file is a chromatogram mzML file
generated by OpenSWATH. If you have n files, you should run the above command n
times for each mzML file and then concatenate the resulting output files.

The individual parameters can be adjusted as follows: 

- ```--peakgroups_infile``` Infile containing peakgroups (outfile from feature_alignment.py
- ```--file_format``` Which input file format is used for ```--peakgroups_infile``` (openswath (default), mprophet or peakview). openswath is used for a file generated by the OpenSwath workflow (OpenSwath + mProphet / pyProphet) while mprophet is used for traditional SRM files generated by the mQuest + mProphet workflow. peakview is for PeakView files.
- `--method` Which method to use (singleShortestPath or singleClosestRun are recommended)
- ```--realign_runs``` Same as ```realign_method``` above, see [(Non)-linear pairwise alignment options](#pairwise-alignment)

### <a name="requant-alignment"></a> Alignment approach

There are multiple alignment approaches available, which can be controlled with ```--method```:

- ```singleShortestPath``` (tree-based alignment): The integration border are taken from the run that is closest to the current run in the guidance tree 
- ```singleClosestRun``` (tree-based alignment): The integration borders are transferred from the single closest run, disregarding the guidance tree 
- ```reference``` (reference-based alignment): The integration borders are aggregated across all runs (see advanced parameters)

If `singleShortestPath` or `singleClosestRun` is given, a tree based alignment
is chosen while using ```reference```, a reference-based alignment is chosen.
Note that using a tree-based alignment. The ```reference``` based approach is
currently not recommended.

## Advanced parameters

- ```--border_option``` (only in effect when ```--method``` is `reference`): How to determine integration border for the aggregate alignment (possible values: max_width, mean, median). All integration borders will be computed across all runs and then an aggregate is computed, using either the maximal width, the mean or the median. Max width will use the maximal possible width (most conservative since it will overestimate the background signal).
- ```--cache_in_memory``` Cache data from a single run in memory
-  ```--disable_isotopic_grouping``` Disable grouping of isotopic variants by peptide_group_label, thus disabling matching of isotopic variants of the same peptide across channels. If turned off, each isotopic channel will be matched independently of the other. If enabled, the more certain identification will be used to infer the location of the peak in the other channel.)
- ```--disable_isotopic_transfer``` Disable the transfer of isotopic boundaries in all cases. If enabled (default), the best (best score) isotopic channel dictates the peak boundaries and all other channels use those boundaries. This ensures consistency in peak picking in all cases.)

